# A Brief Summary of CNN's
1. TOC
{:toc}
## What is a CNN?
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are specifically designed to process and analyse grid-like data, such as images. They are composed of multiple layers that extract meaningful features from raw pixel values, ultimately leading to accurate predictions. The key components of a CNN include:

| Layer | Function |
|-|-|
| Convolutional Layers | These layers apply filters to input data, capturing spatial hierarchies and extracting important features. |
| Pooling Layers | These layers downsample the output of the convolutional layers, reducing the spatial dimensions while preserving the most relevant information. |
| Fully Connected Layers | These layers connect all neurons from the previous layer to the current layer, enabling high-level reasoning and prediction. |

## What does Convolution actually mean?
Convolution is the most important part of a CNN. It involves sliding a filter over the input data, performing element wise operation and summing the resutls to create a feature map. This is done multiple (sometimes many multiple...) times to capture a wide array of features at different scales and orientations. Layers allow the network to automatically learn the most effective filters for sepcific tasks, resulting in the ability to recognise patterns in objects and images.

## How do You Train a CNN?
Training a CNN involves feeding it with labeled data and adjusting its internal parameters (weights and biases) to minimise a defined loss function. Backpropagation and gradient descent are used to update the weights iteratively, allowing the network to learn and generalise from the training data. To be succesful a CNN requires a large labelled data set to effectively train on

## What Are the Applications of a CNN?
The following are areas in which CNNs excel:
- Image Classification: CNNs can classify images into predefined categories with remarkable accuracy, surpassing human performance in some cases.
- Object Detection: CNNs combined with techniques like the region proposal network (R-CNN) have made significant advancements in detecting and localizing objects within images.
- Semantic Segmentation: CNNs can assign class labels to individual pixels, enabling precise object segmentation and scene understanding.
- Facial Recognition: CNNs have played a vital role in facial recognition systems, enabling applications like biometric authentication and emotion detection.

## Training a simple CNN in fastai
fastai can be utilised to make quick and effective models using pretrained CNNs. The following example is taken from fastai basic coding course lesson 1: is it a bird

```python
# Create a data block with test images and resize
path = Path('Images')
dls = DataBlock(
    blocks=(ImageBlock, CategoryBlock), 
    get_items=get_image_files, 
    splitter=RandomSplitter(valid_pct=0.2, seed=42),
    get_y=parent_label,
    item_tfms=[Resize(192, method='squish')]
).dataloaders(path)

# Train the model

learn = vision_learner(dls, resnet18, metrics=error_rate)
learn.fine_tune(3)

# Test
learn.validate()[1]
```
This is a really quick and easy way to train a CNN that should perform pretty well.

## Helpful links
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf

https://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_cvpr_2009/html/Deng_ImageNet_A_Large-Scale_2009_CVPR_paper.html

https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497
